## Boost to Insurance Sector {#boost-to-insurance-sector}

As mentioned before, availability of large volumes of data from the National EMR system should encourage the insurance companies to provide policies that meet the needs of a diverse set of clients without blindly risking their investments. This could prove to be the boost that the moribund private insurance sector needs, to achieve the levels of insurance coverage in other emerging countries.

Government’s role in insurance is going to take a big leap with the launch of the **National Health Protection Scheme (NHPS)**. This will subsume the previously existing program called [Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana (RSBY)](http://www.rsby.gov.in/about_rsby.aspx). The NHPS is expected to provide major relief to families below poverty line. Linking of the beneficiaries with the Aadhaar based medical records can make sure that this scheme achieves its goals of benefiting most people without cost overruns. Hospitals that take care of the patient would be more accurately reimbursed in timely fashion, and with some modification in the terms of the scheme, some relief could be provided to the patients in their time of distress via Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT). Linking of beneficiaries within the NEMRS will ensure that there is no chance of fraud or errors.

NEMRS will simplify the process for making claims, since the details for the conditions for which the claims are made are already available, if the insurance verification system is integrated with the EMR. In effect, the claims processing could be reduced to a click on a button. Additionally, with the use of Blockchain based verification of healthcare events, a legitimate claim will never be denied, and a fraudulent one will never be approved.